# Task 1 - "How to catch the right fish: searching for viruses in sequencing data"
## Abstract
SARS-related pandemics have had an undeniable impact on both the health and social sectors. The history of SARS-related pandemics and major outbreaks is characterized by three distinct, highly pathogenic coronaviruses emerging from animal reservoirs(specifically bats) to cause global health emergencies in the 21st century:
1. The 2002–2004 SARS Outbreak (SARS-CoV-1)
    - Origin - The first severe and readily transmissible disease to emerge in the 21st century, SARS (Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome) was first identified in Guangdong Province, China, in November 2002.
    - Impact - By the time the outbreak was contained in July 2003, there were 8,096 reported cases and 774 deaths across 29 countries, resulting in a case fatality rate of nearly 10%. No cases of SARS-CoV-1 have been reported since 2004.
2. MERS-CoV (2012–Present)
    - Origin - The Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) was first identified in Saudi Arabia in 2012.
    - Impact - MERS has a much higher fatality rate than SARS, with a case fatality rate around 34.4%. As of 2020, over 2,494 
    confirmed cases and 858 deaths have been reported across 27 countries.
3. COVID-19 Pandemic (SARS-CoV-2)
    - Origin - In December 2019, a second strain of SARS-related coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) was identified in Wuhan, Hubei, China.
    - Impact - The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in over 700 million confirmed cases and over 6.8 million deaths, making it significantly more destructive than the 2003 SARS outbreak, although with a lower individual case fatality rate.

## Main
All calculations were performed by two computers with the following components:
- PC 1:
    ```
    OS: Fedora Linux 43 (KDE Plasma Desktop Edition) x86_64
    CPU: AMD Ryzen 7 3700X
    GPU: AMD Radeon RX 7800 XT
    Memory: 32 GiB
    ```
- PC 2:
    ```
    OS: Linux Mint 22.3 x86_64
    CPU: AMD Ryzen 7 8845HS
    GPU: AMD Radeon 780M
    Memory: 32 GiB
    ```

The goal of this work is to identify the pathogen caused the clinical case, decribed in the [article](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-020-2008-3). Methods and calculations are based on deep meta-transcriptomic sequencing of the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid data. By the description of the clinical case, it was concluded that the pathogen has viral type.

The work can be logically divided into 5 steps:
1. Genome assembly from the raw data;
2. Collecting the QUAST-report;
3. Identifying viral contigs;
4. BLASTing viral contigs to figure out which one belongs to the pathogen;
5. Annotating pathogen contig and comparing annotation with one, alailable on GenBank.
### Step 1 - Genome assembly from raw data
The raw sequencing data was obtained using prefetch 3.2.1:
```bash
prefetch SRR10971381
```
The .sra file was then converted to forward and reverse reads in .fastq format using fasterq-dump 3.2.1:
```bash
fasterq-dump SRR10971381
```
Using SPAdes 4.2.0, we tried to assemble the genome:
```bash
spades.py -1 SRR10971381_1.fastq  -2 SRR10971381_2.fastq -o spades_output -t 16 -m 32
```
But SPAdes displayed an error due to lack of RAM:
```bash
The reads contain too many k-mers to fit into available memory. You need approx. 38.8576GB of free RAM to assemble your dataset
```
Therefore, in the next steps we used the already assembled genome
### Step 2 - Colecting QUAST-report
To evaluate the quality of the genome assembly, a QUAST report was generated by the following command:
```bash
quast spades_scaffolds.fasta -o quast_out
```
All report files were saved to [quast_out](https://github.com/noonecanhearyou/analysis-of-genomic-and-transcriptomic-data-itmo-2026/tree/main/task_1/quast_out) folder.
### Step 3 - Identifying viral contigs
To filter out contigs unsuitable for further analysis, all contigs shorter than 3,000 base pairs were discarded, as the minimum viral genome size is ~2,000-3,000 base pairs:
```bash
xargs samtools faidx spades_scaffolds.fasta > 3000.fa
```
Next, the ViralVerify tool was used to clearly distinguish viral contigs from other possible contigs. Results were saved to [virver_out](https://github.com/noonecanhearyou/analysis-of-genomic-and-transcriptomic-data-itmo-2026/tree/main/task_1/virver_out) folder, the database of virus/chromosome-specific HMMs was downloaded from the [official repository](https://github.com/ablab/viralVerify):
```bash
viralverify -f 3000.fa -o virver_out --hmm nbc_hmms.hmm
```
### Step 4 - BLAST

### Step 5 - Genome annotation
Prokka 1.14.6 on the Galaxy platform was selected for genome annotation. This version of prokka was released in early 2020, which will allow us to reproduce the conditions of the outbreak of the pandemic:
```bash
prokka --cpus ${GALAXY_SLOTS:-8} --quiet --outdir outdir --prefix prokka --increment 1 --gffver 3 --mincontig 200 --kingdom Viruses --gcode 1 --evalue 1e-06 /data/dnb12/galaxy_db/files/b/f/5/dataset_bf54d5ed-7a32-436b-9583-9b06ab1b416a.dat
```
As a result, a [genome annotation](https://github.com/noonecanhearyou/analysis-of-genomic-and-transcriptomic-data-itmo-2026/blob/main/task_1/3000_first_contig_annotation.gff3) was obtained in .gff3 format
## Results

## Discussion
